---
title: 'A new project: GuitarChain'
date: '22/9/2023'
cover_image: 'images/posts/audio/guitar-chain_cover.png'
tags: ['audio', 'guitar']
excerpt: "I've started a new project!"
---

Somewhat recently, I started playing guitar, and it's been a really fun journey. But that's not what I'm here to talk about. One of my main goals was to make music. That of course came with a lot of challenges, but one of the biggest obstacles I found were effects. I needed some sort of VST plugin that would give all sorts of effects so I could shape my guitar's sound in any way I liked - and I needed it for free. Of course, I could probably find decent individual effects, but that's not so good for my workflow. I needed something which had a bunch of effects packed into one plugin. In my mind, I imagined something like a virtual pedal board. Unfortunately (or maybe fortunately?) I couldn't find anything like that. So, I did what any reasonable person would do - I decided to make my own plugin. I've named it GuitarChain, and you can find it on [Github](https://github.com/levimcgomes/guitar-chain), but it's very much in a non-existent state (it's even using JUCE - if you read my last post, you'll know I've already moved on to Cmajor). My local version is a bit more developed - but not much. I'm still learning, so it's going to take quite some time before actual progress begins. But I do have some good ideas, so I think it'll end up quite nice. All of it will be open source and 100% free to use. Contributions are welcome, but I don't think the project is yet at a point where it can receive any. With that said, we've reached the end of today's post. Feel free to share your thoughts in the comments - any ideas are welcome, and learning resources are always appreciated! Until the next one goodbye!
